# Introduccion y datos de pre-entrenamiento

So I've wanted to make this video for a while. It is a comprehensive but general audience introduction to large language models like ChatGPT. What I'm hoping to achieve in this video is to give you kind of mental models for thinking through what it is that this tool is. It is obviously magical and amazing in some respects, it's really good at some things, not very good at other things, and there's also a lot of sharp edges to be aware of. So what is behind this text box? You can put anything in there and press enter, but what should we be putting there and what are these words generated back? How does this work and what are you talking to exactly?

So I'm hoping to get at all those topics in this video. We're going to go through the entire pipeline of how this stuff is built but I'm going to keep everything sort of accessible to a general audience. So let's take a look at first how you build something like ChatGPT, and along the way I'm going to talk about some of the sort of cognitive psychological implications of the tools.

So let's build ChatGPT. There's going to be multiple stages arranged sequentially. The first stage is called the pre-training stage and the first step of the pre-training stage is to download and process the internet.

Now to get a sense of what this roughly looks like I recommend looking at this URL here. This company called Hugging Face collected and created and curated this data set called FineWeb, and they go into a lot of detail on this blog post on how they constructed the FineWeb data set. All of the major LLM providers like OpenAI, Anthropic and Google and so on will have some equivalent internally of something like the FineWeb data set.

So roughly what are we trying to achieve here? We're trying to get a ton of text from the internet from publicly available sources. So we're trying to have a huge quantity of very high quality documents and we also want very large diversity of documents because we want to have a lot of knowledge inside these models. So we want large diversity of high quality documents and we want many many of them. Achieving this is quite complicated and as you can see here takes multiple stages to do well.

For example the FineWeb data set, which is fairly representative of what you would see in a production grade application, actually ends up being only about 44 terabytes of disk space. You can get a USB stick for like a terabyte very easily, or I think this could fit on a single hard drive almost today. So this is not a huge amount of data at the end of the day. Even though the internet is very very large we're working with text and we're also filtering it aggressively, so we end up with about 44 terabytes in this example.

## Common Crawl

The starting point for a lot of these efforts and something that contributes most of the data by the end of it is data from Common Crawl. Common Crawl is an organization that has been basically scouring the internet since 2007. As of 2024 for example Common Crawl has indexed 2.7 billion web pages. They have all these crawlers going around the internet and what you end up doing basically is you start with a few seed web pages and then you follow all the links and you just keep following links and you keep indexing all the information and you end up with a ton of data of the internet over time. So this is usually the starting point for a lot of these efforts.

Now this Common Crawl data is quite raw and is filtered in many many different ways.

## Etapas de filtrado

The first thing here is something called URL filtering. What that is referring to is that there's these block lists of basically URLs that are or domains that you don't want to be getting data from. So usually this includes things like malware websites, spam websites, marketing websites, racist websites, adult sites and things like that. So there's a ton of different types of websites that are just eliminated at this stage because we don't want them in our data set.

The second part is text extraction. You have to remember that all these web pages, this is the raw HTML of these web pages that are being saved by these crawlers. When I go to inspect here, this is what the raw HTML actually looks like. You'll notice that it's got all this markup like lists and stuff like that and there's CSS and all this kind of stuff. So this is computer code almost for these web pages, but what we really want is we just want this text. We just want the text of this web page and we don't want the navigation and things like that. So there's a lot of filtering and processing and heuristics that go into adequately filtering for just the good content of these web pages.

The next stage here is language filtering. For example FineWeb filters using a language classifier. They try to guess what language every single web page is in and then they only keep web pages that have more than 65% of English as an example. You can get a sense that this is like a design decision that different companies can take for themselves. What fraction of all different types of languages are we going to include in our data set? Because for example if we filter out all of the Spanish as an example then you might imagine that our model later will not be very good at Spanish because it's just never seen that much data of that language. So different companies can focus on multilingual performance to a different degree. FineWeb is quite focused on English and so their language model if they end up training one later will be very good at English but may not be very good at other languages.

After language filtering there's a few other filtering steps and deduplication and things like that, finishing with for example the PII removal. This is personally identifiable information. So as an example, addresses, Social Security numbers and things like that, you would try to detect them and you would try to filter out those kinds of web pages from the data set as well.

So there's a lot of stages here. It is a fairly extensive part of the pre-processing and you end up with for example the FineWeb data set. When you click in on it you can see some examples of what this actually ends up looking like. Anyone can download this on the Hugging Face web page. Here are some examples of the final text that ends up in the training set. This is some article about tornadoes in 2012. This next one is something about "did you know you have two little yellow 9-volt battery sized adrenal glands in your body?" So this is some kind of a odd medical article.

Just think of these as basically web pages on the internet, filtered just for the text in various ways. And now we have a ton of text, 40 terabytes of it, and that now is the starting point for the next step of this stage.

I took the first 200 web pages here, and remember we have tons of them, and I just take all that text and I just put it all together, concatenate it. So this is what we end up with, we just get this raw text, raw internet text, and there's a ton of it even in these 200 web pages. I can continue zooming out here and we just have this massive tapestry of text data and this text data has all these patterns. What we want to do now is we want to start training neural networks on this data so the neural networks can internalize and model how this text flows. So we just have this giant texture of text and now we want to get neural nets that mimic it.
