# Entrenamiento de redes neuronales

Now we get to the fun part which is the neural network training. This is where a lot of the heavy lifting happens computationally when you're training these neural networks. What we do here in this step is we want to model the statistical relationships of how these tokens follow each other in the sequence.

## Prediccion del siguiente token

What we do is we come into the data and we take windows of tokens. We take a window of tokens from this data fairly randomly. The window's length can range anywhere between zero tokens actually all the way up to some maximum size that we decide on. For example in practice you could see a token window of say 8,000 tokens. In principle we can use arbitrary window lengths of tokens, but processing very long window sequences would just be very computationally expensive so we just kind of decide that say 8,000 is a good number or 4,000 or 16,000, and we crop it there.

In this example I'm going to be taking the first four tokens just so everything fits nicely. These tokens -- we're going to take a window of four tokens: "bar", "view", "in", "and", "space", "single" -- which are these token IDs.

Now what we're trying to do here is we're trying to basically predict the token that comes next in the sequence. So 3962 comes next. What we do now here is that we call this the context -- these four tokens are context and they feed into a neural network.

I'm going to go into the detail of what's inside this neural network in a little bit. For now it's important to understand the input and the output of the neural net. The input are sequences of tokens of variable length, anywhere between zero and some maximum size like 8,000. The output now is a prediction for what comes next. Because our vocabulary has 100,277 possible tokens, the neural network is going to output exactly that many numbers. And all of those numbers correspond to the probability of that token as coming next in the sequence. So it's making guesses about what comes next.

In the beginning this neural network is randomly initialized. It's a random transformation, so these probabilities in the very beginning of the training are also going to be kind of random. Here I have three examples but keep in mind that there's 100,000 numbers here. So the probability of this token "space Direction", neural network is saying that this is 4% likely right now. 11799 is 2%. And then here the probability of 3962 which is "post" is 3%.

Now of course we've sampled this window from our data set so we know what comes next. We know and that's the label. We know that the correct answer is that 3962 actually comes next in the sequence.

## Actualizacion de la red

So now what we have is this mathematical process for doing an update to the neural network. We have the way of tuning it. We know that this probability here of 3% we want this probability to be higher and we want the probabilities of all the other tokens to be lower. So we have a way of mathematically calculating how to adjust and update the neural network so that the correct answer has a slightly higher probability. If I do an update to the neural network, now the next time I feed this particular sequence of four tokens into neural network, the neural network will be slightly adjusted now and it will say "okay, post is maybe 4% and case now maybe is 1% and Direction could become 2% or something like that."

So we have a way of nudging, of slightly updating the neural net to basically give a higher probability to the correct token that comes next in the sequence. And now you just have to remember that this process happens not just for this token here where these four fed in and predicted this one. This process happens at the same time for all of these tokens in the entire data set. In practice we sample little windows, little batches of windows, and then at every single one of these tokens we want to adjust our neural network so that the probability of that token becomes slightly higher. This all happens in parallel in large batches of these tokens and this is the process of training the neural network. It's a sequence of updating it so that its predictions match up the statistics of what actually happens in your training set and its probabilities become consistent with the statistical patterns of how these tokens follow each other in the data.

## Internos de la red neuronal

Let's now briefly get into the internals of these neural networks just to give you a sense of what's inside. As I mentioned we have these inputs that are sequences of tokens. In this case this is four input tokens but this can be anywhere between zero up to let's say 8,000 tokens. In principle this can be an infinite number of tokens; we just -- it would just be too computationally expensive to process an infinite number of tokens so we just crop it at a certain length and that becomes the maximum context length of that model.

Now these inputs X are mixed up in a giant mathematical expression together with the parameters or the weights of these neural networks. Here I'm showing six example parameters and their setting, but in practice these modern neural networks will have billions of these parameters. In the beginning these parameters are completely randomly set. With a random setting of parameters you might expect that this neural network would make random predictions and it does -- in the beginning it's totally random predictions. But it's through this process of iteratively updating the network -- and we call that process training a neural network -- that the setting of these parameters gets adjusted such that the outputs of our neural network become consistent with the patterns seen in our training set.

Think of these parameters as kind of like knobs on a DJ set. As you're twiddling these knobs you're getting different predictions for every possible token sequence input. Training a neural network just means discovering a setting of parameters that seems to be consistent with the statistics of the training set.

Let me just give you an example what this giant mathematical expression looks like just to give you a sense. Modern networks are massive expressions with trillions of terms probably, but let me just show you a simple example. It would look something like this. These are the kinds of expressions just to show you that it's not very scary. We have inputs X like X1, X2. In this case two example inputs, and they get mixed up with the weights of the network W0, W1, 2, 3, etc. And this mixing is simple things like multiplication, addition, exponentiation, division, etc. It is the subject of neural network architecture research to design effective mathematical expressions that have a lot of kind of convenient characteristics: they are expressive, they're optimizable, they're parallelizable, etc. But at the end of the day these are not complex expressions and basically they mix up the inputs with the parameters to make predictions. We're optimizing the parameters of this neural network so that the predictions come out consistent with the training set.

## El Transformer

I would like to show you an actual production grade example of what these neural networks look like. For that I encourage you to go to this website that has a very nice visualization of one of these networks.

This is what you will find on this website. This neural network here that is used in production settings has this special kind of structure. This network is called the Transformer. This particular one as an example has roughly 85,000 parameters. Here on the top we take the inputs which are the token sequences and then information flows through the neural network until the output, which here are the logit/softmax -- but these are the predictions for what comes next, what token comes next.

Then here there's a sequence of transformations and all these intermediate values that get produced inside this mathematical expression as it is sort of predicting what comes next. As an example, these tokens are embedded into kind of like this distributed representation as it's called. So every possible token has kind of like a vector that represents it inside the neural network. First we embed the tokens and then those values kind of flow through this diagram. These are all very simple mathematical expressions individually: we have layer norms and matrix multiplications and softmaxes and so on. Here kind of like the attention block of this Transformer, and then information kind of flows through into the multi-layer perceptron block and so on.

All these numbers here, these are the intermediate values of the expression. You can almost think of these as kind of like the firing rates of these synthetic neurons, but I would caution you to not think of it too much like neurons because these are extremely simple neurons compared to the neurons you would find in your brain. Your biological neurons are very complex dynamical processes that have memory and so on. There's no memory in this expression; it's a fixed mathematical expression from input to output with no memory. It's just stateless. So these are very simple neurons in comparison to biological neurons, but you can still kind of loosely think of this as like a synthetic piece of brain tissue if you like to think about it that way.

I'm not actually going to dwell too much on the precise kind of mathematical details of all these transformations. Honestly I don't think it's that important to get into. What's really important to understand is that this is a mathematical function. It is parameterized by some fixed set of parameters like say 85,000 of them. It is a way of transforming inputs into outputs. As we twiddle the parameters we are getting different kinds of predictions. We need to find a good setting of these parameters so that the predictions sort of match up with the patterns seen in training set. So that's the Transformer.

## Inferencia

I've shown you the internals of the neural network and we talked a bit about the process of training it. I want to cover one more major stage of working with these networks and that is the stage called inference. In inference what we're doing is we're generating new data from the model. We want to basically see what kind of patterns it has internalized in the parameters of its network.

To generate from the model is relatively straightforward. We start with some tokens that are basically your prefix, like what you want to start with. Say we want to start with the token 91. Well we feed it into the network and remember that the network gives us probabilities -- it gives us this probability vector here. So what we can do now is we can basically flip a biased coin. We can sample basically a token based on this probability distribution. The tokens that are given high probability by the model are more likely to be sampled when you flip this biased coin. You can think of it that way. So we sample from the distribution to get a single unique token. For example token 860 comes next.

Then we continue the process. After 91 there's 860, we append it and we again ask what is the third token. Let's sample. And let's just say that it's 287 exactly as here. Let's do that again, we come back in. Now we have a sequence of three and we ask what is the likely fourth token and we sample from that and get this one. And now let's say we do it one more time. We take those four, we sample, and we get this one. And this 13659 -- this is not actually 3962 as we had before. So this token is the token "article" instead. So "viewing a single article" -- and so in this case we didn't exactly reproduce the sequence that we saw here in the training data.

Keep in mind that these systems are stochastic. They have -- we're sampling and we're flipping coins and sometimes we luck out and we reproduce some like small chunk of the text in training set but sometimes we're getting a token that was not verbatim part of any of the documents in the training data. So we're going to get sort of like remixes of the data that we saw in the training because at every step of the way we can flip and get a slightly different token. And then once that token makes it in, if you sample the next one and so on, you very quickly start to generate token streams that are very different from the token streams that were in the training documents. So statistically they will have similar properties but they are not identical to your training data. They're kind of like inspired by the training data.

So basically inference is just predicting from these distributions one at a time. We continue feeding back tokens and getting the next one and we're always flipping these coins. Depending on how lucky or unlucky we get we might get very different kinds of patterns depending on how we sample from these probability distributions. So that's inference.
