# Post-entrenamiento: Supervised Fine-Tuning

This is kind of like a brief summary of the things we talked about so far. We wish to train LLM assistants like ChatGPT. We've discussed the first stage of that which is the pre-training stage. We saw that really what it comes down to is we take internet documents, we break them up into these tokens (these atoms of little text chunks) and then we predict token sequences using neural networks. The output of this entire stage is this base model. It is the setting of the parameters of this network. This base model is basically an internet document simulator on the token level. It can just generate token sequences that have the same kind of statistics as internet documents. We saw that we can use it in some applications but we actually need to do better. We want an assistant. We want to be able to ask questions and we want the model to give us answers. So we need to now go into the second stage which is called the post-training stage.

## Conversaciones como datos de entrenamiento

We take our base model, our internet document simulator, and hand it off to post training. These stages in post training are going to be computationally much less expensive. Most of the computational work, all of the massive data centers and all of the sort of heavy compute and millions of dollars, are the pre-training stage. But now we go into the slightly cheaper but still extremely important stage called post training where we turn this LLM model into an assistant.

So what we want to do is we want to start thinking about conversations and these are conversations that can be multi-turn. They are in the simplest case a conversation between a human and an assistant. For example we can imagine the conversation could look something like this: when a human says "what is 2 + 2" the assistant should respond with something like "2 + 2 is 4." When a human follows up and says "what if it was star instead of a plus," assistant could respond with something like this. And similar here, this is another example showing that the assistant could also have some kind of a personality here that it's kind of nice. In the third example I'm showing that when a human is asking for something that we don't wish to help with, we can produce what's called refusal, we can say that we cannot help with that.

In other words what we want to do now is we want to think through how an assistant should interact with the human. We want to program the assistant and its behavior in these conversations. Now because this is neural networks we're not going to be programming these explicitly in code. Because this is neural networks everything is done through neural network training on data sets. Because of that we are going to be implicitly programming the assistant by creating data sets of conversations.

These are three independent examples of conversations in a data set. An actual data set will be much larger. It could have hundreds of thousands of conversations that are multi-turn, very long, etc. and would cover a diverse breadth of topics.

## Human labelers y labeling instructions

Where is this data coming from? Like "2 times 2 equals 4, same as 2 + 2," etc. -- where does that come from? This comes from human labelers. We will basically give human labelers some conversational context and we will ask them to basically give the ideal assistant response in this situation. A human will write out the ideal response for an assistant in any situation. Then we're going to get the model to basically train on this and to imitate those kinds of responses.

So the way this works then is we are going to take our base model which we produced in the pre-training stage, and this base model was trained on internet documents. We're now going to take that data set of internet documents and we're gonna throw it out and we're going to substitute a new data set. That's going to be a data set of conversations. We're going to continue training the model on these conversations, on this new data set of conversations. What happens is that the model will very rapidly adjust and will sort of learn the statistics of how this assistant responds to human queries. Then later during inference we'll be able to basically prime the assistant and get the response. It will be imitating what the human labelers would do in that situation.

The pre-training stage can in practice take roughly three months of training on many thousands of computers. The post-training stage will typically be much shorter, like 3 hours for example. That's because the data set of conversations that we're going to create here manually is much much smaller than the data set of text on the internet.

Fundamentally we're just going to take our base model, we're going to continue training using the exact same algorithm, the exact same everything, except we're swapping out the data set for conversations.

## InstructGPT y datos de conversaciones

The first paper that I would like to show you and the first effort in this direction is this paper from OpenAI in 2022 and this paper was called InstructGPT, or the technique that they developed. This was the first time that OpenAI has kind of talked about how you can take language models and fine-tune them on conversations.

In section 3.4 they talk about the human contractors that they hired, in this case from Upwork or through Scale AI, to construct these conversations. There are human labelers involved whose job it is professionally to create these conversations. These labelers are asked to come up with prompts and then they are asked to also complete the ideal assistant responses. These are the kinds of prompts that people came up with: "list five ideas for how to regain enthusiasm for my career," "what are the top 10 science fiction books I should read next," "translate this sentence to Spanish," etc.

When we scroll down a little bit further, we see that here we have this excerpt of labeling instructions that are given to the human labelers. The company that is developing the language model like for example OpenAI writes up labeling instructions for how the humans should create ideal responses. On a high level you're asking people to be helpful, truthful, and harmless. Roughly speaking the company comes up with the labeling instructions. Usually they are not this short; usually there are hundreds of pages and people have to study them professionally. Then they write out the ideal assistant responses following those labeling instructions.

## Datos sinteticos y datasets modernos

The state-of-the-art has kind of advanced in the last 2 or 3 years since the InstructGPT paper. In particular it's not very common for humans to be doing all the heavy lifting just by themselves anymore and that's because we now have language models and these language models are helping us create these data sets and conversations. It is very rare that the people will like literally just write out the response from scratch. It is a lot more likely that they will use an existing LLM to basically come up with an answer and then they will edit it or things like that. So there's many different ways in which now LLMs have started to kind of permeate this post-training stack. LLMs are basically used pervasively to help create these massive data sets of conversations.

Ultra Chat is one such example of a more modern data set of conversations. It is to a very large extent synthetic. These data sets have now millions of conversations. These conversations are mostly synthetic but they're probably edited to some extent by humans and they span a huge diversity of areas. These are fairly extensive artifacts by now. There's all these SFT mixtures as they're called. You have a mixture of lots of different types and sources and it's partially synthetic, partially human.

## Tokenizacion de conversaciones

Everything in these models has to be turned into tokens because everything is just about token sequences. So how do we turn conversations into token sequences is the question. For that we need to design some kind of encoding. This is kind of similar to maybe if you're familiar with for example the TCP/IP packet in networking on the internet. There are precise rules and protocols for how you represent information, how everything is structured together so that you have all this kind of data laid out in a way that is written out on a paper and that everyone can agree on. It's the same thing now happening in LLMs. We need some kind of data structures and we need to have some rules around how these data structures like conversations get encoded and decoded to and from tokens.

If you go to Tik Tokenizer, this conversation -- this is how it is represented for the language model. Here we have a user and an assistant iterating in this two-turn conversation. The way it gets turned into a token sequence: at the end this conversation between a user and assistant ends up being 49 tokens. It is a one-dimensional sequence of 49 tokens.

All the different LLMs will have a slightly different format or protocols and it's a little bit of a wild west right now. For example GPT-4o does it in the following way: you have this special token called "im_start" (short for imaginary monologue start), then you have to specify whose turn it is (for example "user"), then you have "im_sep" (imaginary monologue separator), then it's the exact question, the tokens of the question, and then you have to close it with "im_end." The important thing to mention here is that "im_start" is not text. "im_start" is a special token that gets added. It's a new token that we create in a post-training stage and we introduce. These special tokens like "im_sep," "im_start," etc. are introduced and interspersed with text so that they sort of get the model to learn that "hey this is the start of a turn, for who is it, what does the user say, then the user ends, then it's a new start of a turn by the assistant, what does the assistant say, etc."

During inference -- say we've trained a model on these kinds of data sets of conversations and now we want to do inference. When you're on ChatGPT, you come to ChatGPT and you have say like a dialogue with it. On the servers of OpenAI, they put in "im_start assistant im_sep" and this is where they end it. They construct this context and now they start sampling from the model. So it's at this stage that they will go to the model and say "okay what is a good first token, what is a good second token, what is a good third token," and this is where the LLM takes over and creates a response.

## A que le estas hablando realmente

I want to dispel a little bit of the magic of talking to an AI. When you go to ChatGPT and you give it a question and then you hit enter, what is coming back is kind of statistically aligned with what's happening in the training set. And these training sets, they really just have a seed in humans following labeling instructions.

So what are you actually talking to in ChatGPT or how should you think about it? Well it's not coming from some magical AI. Roughly speaking it's coming from something that is statistically imitating human labelers which comes from labeling instructions written by these companies. So you're kind of getting -- it's almost as if you're asking a human labeler. Imagine that the answer that is given to you from ChatGPT is some kind of a simulation of a human labeler. It's kind of like asking what would a human labeler say in this kind of a conversation.

And this human labeler is not just like a random person from the internet because these companies actually hire experts. So for example when you are asking questions about code, the human labelers that would be involved in creation of these conversation data sets, they will usually be educated expert people. You're kind of like asking a question of like a simulation of those people. So you're not talking to a magical AI, you're talking to an average labeler. This average labeler is probably fairly highly skilled, but you're talking to kind of an instantaneous simulation of that kind of a person that would be hired in the construction of these data sets.
