# Limitaciones cognitivas y tokens para pensar

## Conocimiento de si mismo

What I see very often on the internet is that people do something like this: they ask LLMs something like "what model are you and who built you?" Basically this question is a little bit nonsensical and the reason I say that is that this thing is not a person. It doesn't have a persistent existence in any way. It sort of boots up, processes tokens, and shuts off. It does that for every single person. It just kind of builds up a context window of conversation and then everything gets deleted. So this entity is kind of restarted from scratch every single conversation. It has no persistent self, it has no sense of self, it's a token tumbler and it follows the statistical regularities of its training set.

So it doesn't really make sense to ask it who are you, what built you, etc. By default if you do what I described and just by default and from nowhere you're going to get some pretty random answers. For example let's pick on Falcon which is a fairly old model: it says "I was built by OpenAI based on the GPT-3 model." It's totally making stuff up. The fact that it's "built by OpenAI" -- I think a lot of people would take this as evidence that this model was somehow trained on OpenAI data or something like that. I don't actually think that that's necessarily true. The reason for that is that if you don't explicitly program the model to answer these kinds of questions then what you're going to get is its statistical best guess at the answer. OpenAI and ChatGPT are very prominent in internet documents and so I think what's actually likely to be happening here is that this is just its hallucinated label for what it is. Its self-identity is that it's ChatGPT by OpenAI and it's only saying that because there's a ton of data on the internet of answers like this that are actually coming from ChatGPT.

You can override this as a developer if you have a LLM model. There are a few ways to do that. For example there's the OLMo model from Allen AI. This is one LLM and it is fully open source. Looking at its SFT mixture -- this is the data mixture of the fine tuning -- we see that there's a bunch of stuff in the mixture and there's a total of 1 million conversations here. But here we have "olmo_to_hardcoded" -- these are 240 conversations. These are hardcoded: "tell me about yourself" says user and then the assistant says "I'm an open language model developed by AI2 Allen Institute of Artificial Intelligence, etc." So these are all kinds of cooked up hardcoded questions about OLMo 2 and the correct answers to give in these cases. If you take 240 questions like this or conversations, put them into your training set and fine tune with it, then the model will actually be expected to parrot this stuff later. If you don't give it this, then it's probably going to say it's ChatGPT by OpenAI.

There's one more way to sometimes do this: in these conversations between human and assistant, sometimes there's a special message called system message at the very beginning of the conversation. In the system message you can actually hardcode and remind the model that "hey you are a model developed by OpenAI and your name is ChatGPT 4o and you were trained on this date and your knowledge cut off is this." Basically it kind of documents the model a little bit and then this is inserted into your conversations. So when you go on ChatGPT you see a blank page but actually the system message is kind of hidden in there and those tokens are in the context window. So those are the two ways to kind of program the models to talk about themselves. Either it's done through data like this or it's done through system message and things like that, basically invisible tokens that are in the context window and remind the model of its identity. But it's all just kind of cooked up and bolted on in some way. It's not actually deeply there in any real sense as it would be for a human.

## Los modelos necesitan tokens para pensar

I want to now continue to the section which deals with the computational capabilities or like I should say the native computational capabilities of these models in problem solving scenarios. In particular we have to be very careful with these models when we construct our examples of conversations. There's a lot of sharp edges here.

Consider the following prompt from a human: "Emily buys three apples and two oranges. Each orange costs $2. The total cost is $13. What is the cost of each apple?" Very simple math question. Now there are two answers here on the left and on the right. They are both correct answers. They both say that the answer is three, which is correct. But one of these two is a significantly better answer for the assistant than the other.

The key to this question is to realize and remember that when the models are training and also inferencing they are working in a one-dimensional sequence of tokens from left to right. I often have in my mind this picture: I imagine basically the token sequence evolving from left to right. To always produce the next token in a sequence we are feeding all these tokens into the neural network and this neural network then gives the probabilities for the next token in sequence.

The important thing to realize is that roughly speaking there's basically a finite number of layers of computation that happen here. A typical modern state-of-the-art network would have more like say 100 layers or something like that. There's only 100 layers of computation to go from the previous token sequence to the probabilities for the next token. So there's a finite amount of computation that happens here for every single token. You should think of this as a very small amount of computation. This amount of computation is almost roughly fixed for every single token in this sequence. So you can't imagine the model to basically do arbitrary computation in a single forward pass to get a single token.

What that means is that we actually have to distribute our reasoning and our computation across many tokens. Because every single token is only spending a finite amount of computation on it, we kind of want to distribute the computation across many tokens and we can't have too much computation or expect too much computation out of the model in any single individual token.

That's why the left answer here is significantly worse. Imagine going from left to right here: "the answer is $" and then right here we're expecting it to basically cram all of the computation of this problem into this single token. It has to emit the correct answer "three." Once we've emitted the answer "three," we're expecting it to say all these tokens but at this point we've already produced the answer and it's already in the context window. So anything here is just post-hoc justification of why this is the answer. It's not actually being calculated here.

That's why the answer on the right is significantly better because we are distributing this computation across the answer. We're actually getting the model to sort of slowly come to the answer from the left to right. We're getting intermediate results. We're saying okay the total cost of oranges is four, so 13 - 4 is 9. We're creating intermediate calculations and each one of these calculations is by itself not that expensive. We're teaching the model here to spread out its reasoning and to spread out its computation over the tokens.

## Aritmetica mental vs herramientas

If I was in practice trying to actually solve this in my day-to-day life I might actually not trust that the model does all the intermediate calculations correctly here. So actually probably what I'd do is something like this: I would say "use code." That's because code is one of the possible tools that ChatGPT can use. Instead of it having to do mental arithmetic, I don't fully trust it. Especially if the numbers get really big there's no guarantee that the model will do this correctly. Any one of these intermediate steps might in principle fail. We're using neural networks to do mental arithmetic, kind of like you doing mental arithmetic in your brain. It might just screw up some of the intermediate results.

So the model can write code and I can inspect that this code is correct. It's not relying on its mental arithmetic. It is using the Python interpreter to basically write out the code that calculates the result. I would personally trust this a lot more because this came out of a Python program which I think has a lot more correctness guarantees than the mental arithmetic of a language model.

That's why I called this section "models need tokens to think." Distribute your computation across many tokens. Ask models to create intermediate results, or whenever you can lean on tools and tool use instead of allowing the models to do all of the stuff in their memory. If they try to do it all in their memory I don't fully trust it and prefer to use tools whenever possible.

## Conteo y spelling

I want to show you one more example: counting. Models actually are not very good at counting for the exact same reason. You're asking for way too much in a single individual token. For example "how many dots are below" and then I just put in a bunch of dots. ChatGPT says "there are" and then it just tries to solve the problem in a single token. In a single forward pass of a network there's not that much computation that can happen there. The answer is not correct. But if I say "use code" -- what happens is it creates a string in Python, copies the dots, and calls Python's count routine. The Python interpreter is doing the counting, it's not the model's mental arithmetic doing the counting.

The models also have many other little cognitive deficits here and there. These are kind of sharp edges of the technology to be aware of over time. As an example the models are not very good with all kinds of spelling related tasks. I told you that we would loop back around to tokenization. The reason for this is that the models don't see the characters; they see tokens. Their entire world is about tokens which are these little text chunks. So they don't see characters like our eyes do. Very simple character level tasks often fail.

For example I'm giving it a string "ubiquitous" and I'm asking it to print only every third character starting with the first one. When you go to Tik Tokenizer and you look at "ubiquitous," we see that it is three tokens. You and I see "ubiquitous" and we can easily access the individual letters because we kind of see them. But the models don't have access to the individual letters. They see this as these three tokens. The model has to discover how many of all these different letters are packed into all these different tokens. The reason we even use tokens is mostly for efficiency. I think a lot of people are interested to delete tokens entirely. Like we should really have character level or byte level models. It's just that that would create very long sequences and people don't know how to deal with that right now. So while we have the token world, any kind of spelling tasks are not actually expected to work super well.

A very famous example of that recently is "how many R's are there in strawberry?" This went viral many times. Basically the models now get it correct (they say there are three Rs in strawberry) but for a very long time all the state-of-the-art models would insist that there are only two Rs in strawberry. We are combining the difficulty of seeing the characters with the difficulty of counting and that's why the models struggled with this.

## El queso suizo de las capacidades

The models are not very good at very simple questions like this: "is 9.11 bigger than 9.9?" -- the model says 9.11 is bigger than 9.9, which is obviously wrong. How is it that the model can do so great at Olympiad grade problems but then fail on very simple problems like this? A bunch of people studied this in depth and what they found was that when you scrutinize the activations inside the neural network, a bunch of neurons inside the neural network light up that are usually associated with Bible verses. So I think the model is kind of reminded that these almost look like Bible verse markers and in a Bible verse setting 9.11 would come after 9.9. So basically the model somehow finds it cognitively very distracting that in Bible verses 9.11 would be greater.

It basically just doesn't fully make sense and it's not fully understood. There's a few jagged issues like that. So treat this as what it is which is a stochastic system that is really magical but that you can't also fully trust. You want to use it as a tool, not as something that you kind of let rip on a problem and copy paste the results.
